Writing review of common-threats.en.md (#1836)
privacyguides/privacyguides.org: docs/basics/common-threats.en.md

- <span class="pg-orange">:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks</span> - Being protected from things like malware, data breaches, and other attacks that are made against many people at once.
- <span class="pg-teal">:material-server-network: Service Providers</span> - Protecting your data from service providers (e.g. with E2EE, which renders your data unreadable to the server).
- <span class="pg-blue">:material-eye-outline: Mass Surveillance</span> - Protection from government agencies, organizations, websites, and services which work together to track your activities.
- <span class="pg-brown">:material-account-cash: Surveillance Capitalism</span> - Protecting yourself from big advertising networks, like Google and Facebook, as well as a myriad of other third-party data collectors.
- <span class="pg-green">:material-account-search: Public Exposure</span> - Limiting the information about you that is accessible online—to search engines or the general public.
- <span class="pg-blue-gray">:material-close-outline: Censorship</span> - Avoiding censored access to information or being censored yourself when speaking online.

> Some of these threats may be more important to you than others, depending on your specific concerns. For example, a software developer with access to valuable or critical data may be primarily concerned with <span class="pg-red">:material-target-account: Targeted Attacks</span>, but beyond that, they probably still want to protect their personal data from being swept up in <span class="pg-blue">:material-eye-outline: Mass Surveillance</span> programs. Similarly, many people may be primarily concerned with <span class="pg-green">:material-account-search: Public Exposure</span> of their personal data, but they should still be wary of security-focused issues, such as <span class="pg-orange">:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks</span>—like malware affecting their devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of these threats may be more important to you than others, depending on your specific concerns. For example, a software developer with access to valuable or critical data may be primarily concerned with <span class="pg-red">:material-target-account: Targeted Attacks</span>, but they probably still want to protect their personal data from being swept up in <span class="pg-blue">:material-eye-outline: Mass Surveillance</span> programs. Similarly, many people may be primarily concerned with <span class="pg-green">:material-account-search: Public Exposure</span> of their personal data, but they should still be wary of security-focused issues, such as <span class="pg-orange">:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks</span>—like malware affecting their devices.
```

Not sure I agree with https://github.com/privacyguides/privacyguides.org/pull/1836#discussion_r994926735 but I think this is a better solution anyways.

Reviewer 2: Yes, i really don't like superfluous words like "beyond that". Pretty sure when this page was originally written i didn't get to check thoroughly.

> Some of these threats may be more important to you than others, depending on your specific concerns. For example, a software developer with access to valuable or critical data may be primarily concerned with <span class="pg-red">:material-target-account: Targeted Attacks</span>, but, beyond that, they probably still want to protect their personal data from being swept up in <span class="pg-blue">:material-eye-outline: Mass Surveillance</span> programs. Similarly, many people may be primarily concerned with <span class="pg-green">:material-account-search: Public Exposure</span> of their personal data, but they should still be wary of security-focused issues, such as <span class="pg-orange">:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks</span>—like malware affecting their devices.

Author: "Beyond that" is an embedded clause, so this one is necessary.

    Mobile operating systems generally have better application sandboxing than desktop operating systems: Apps can't obtain root access, and require permission for access to system resources.

    Desktop operating systems generally lag behind on proper sandboxing. ChromeOS has similar sandboxing capabilities to Android, and macOS has full system permission control (and developers can opt-in to sandboxing for applications). However, these operating systems do transmit identifying information to their respective OEMs. Linux tends to not submit information to system vendors, but it has poor protection against exploits and malicious apps. This can be mitigated somewhat with specialized distributions which make significant use of virtual machines or containers, such as Qubes OS.

<span class="pg-red">:material-target-account: Targeted Attacks</span>

Targeted attacks, against a specific person, are more problematic to deal with. Common attacks include sending malicious documents via email, exploiting vulnerabilities (e.g. in browsers and operating systems), and physical attacks. If this is a concern for you, you should employ more advanced threat mitigation strategies.

!!! tip

>     By design, **web browsers**, **email clients**, and **office applications** typically run untrusted code, sent to you from third parties. Running multiple virtual machines—to separate applications like these from your host system, as well as each other—is one technique you can use to mitigate the chance of an exploit in these applications compromising the rest of your system. For example, technologies like Qubes OS or Microsoft Defender Application Guard, on Windows, provide convenient methods to do this.

Author: Similarly, "on Windows" is an embedded clause, so the commas are necessary.

If you are concerned about **physical attacks**, you should use an operating system with a secure verified boot implementation, such as Android, iOS, macOS, or [Windows (with TPM)](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/information-protection/secure-the-windows-10-boot-process). You should also make sure that your drive is encrypted, and that the operating system uses a TPM or Secure [Enclave](https://support.apple.com/guide/security/secure-enclave-sec59b0b31ff/1/web/1) or [Element](https://developers.google.com/android/security/android-ready-se) to rate limite attempts to enter the encryption passphrase. You should avoid sharing your computer with people you don't trust, because most desktop operating systems don't encrypt data separately, per-user.

## Privacy From Service Providers

<span class="pg-teal">:material-server-network: Service Providers</span>

> We live in a world where almost everything is connected to the internet. Our messages, emails, and social interactions are typically stored on a server, somewhere. Generally, when you send someone a message, it's then stored on a server; when your friend wants to read the message, the server will show it to them.

Author: Sounds good! I'll retain "private" message.

"when you send someone a message" is an embedded clause, though, so comma is necessary.

The second part should be revised to either retain the comma and embed the conditional phrase:

> it's then stored on a server, and, when your friend wants to read the message, the server will show it to them.

Or, it should use a semi-colon and have the conditional phrase become a subordinate clause:

> it's then stored on a server; when your friend wants to read the message, the server will show it to them.

> We live in a world where almost everything is connected to the internet. Our messages, emails, and social interactions are typically stored on a server, somewhere. Generally, when you send someone a message, it's then stored on a server; when your friend wants to read the message, the server will show it to them.

Reviewer: I disagree, but this is the same issue as https://github.com/privacyguides/privacyguides.org/pull/1836#discussion_r996249862 I think?

> We live in a world where almost everything is connected to the internet. Our messages, emails, and social interactions are typically stored on a server, somewhere. Generally, when you send someone a message, it's then stored on a server; when your friend wants to read the message, the server will show it to them.

Author: It looks like this has been overwritten, but this one is tricky.

Despite "generally" acting as the [introductory phrase](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/example/english/generally), "when you send someone a message" uses "when" as a conjunction and precedes an independent clause, so [it does need a comma](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/grammar/british-grammar/when). [These](https://www.pristineword.com/comma-when/) are some good examples. This is also true for "when your friend wants to read the message, the server..."

It's weird because you're right in that they *are* both restrictive dependent clauses, but it's just a thing with when-clauses.

Finally, the comma before and is fine, since it [bridges a complex sentence](https://www.grammarly.com/blog/comma-in-complex-sentences/). 

I don't actually know whether a comma is needed *after* "and" (i.e. to introduce the when-clause"), but I think it's clear either way! :smile: 

Note: I don't think any of these rules are different for American English, but just lmk if they are!

The obvious problem with this is that the service provider (or a hacker who has compromised the server) can access your conversations whenever and however they want, without you ever knowing. This applies to many common services, like SMS messaging, Telegram, and Discord.

Thankfully, E2EE can alleviate this issue by encrypting communications between you and your desired recipients before they are even sent to the server. The confidentiality of your messages is guaranteed, assuming the service provider doesn't have access to the private keys of either party.

!!! note "Note on Web-based Encryption"

    In practice, the effectiveness of different E2EE implementations varies. Applications, such as [Signal](../real-time-communication.md#signal), run natively on your device, and every copy of the application is the same across different installations. If the service provider were to introduce a [backdoor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backdoor_(computing)) in their application—in an attempt to steal your private keys—it could later be detected with [reverse engineering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_engineering).

>     On the other hand, web-based E2EE implementations, such as ProtonMail's webmail or Bitwarden's *Web Vault*, rely on the server dynamically serving JavaScript code to the browser to handle cryptography. A malicious server can target you and send you malicious JavaScript code to steal your encryption key (and it would be extremely hard to notice). Because the server can choose to serve different web clients to different people—even if you noticed the attack—it would be incredibly hard to prove the provider's guilt.

Reviewer: @dngray's getting a little trigger-happy with that "commit suggestion" button https://github.com/privacyguides/privacyguides.org/pull/1836#discussion_r994945666 :)

```suggestion
    On the other hand, web-based E2EE implementations, such as Proton Mail's webmail or Bitwarden's *Web Vault*, rely on the server dynamically serving JavaScript code to the browser to handle cryptography. A malicious server can target you and send you malicious JavaScript code to steal your encryption key (and it would be extremely hard to notice). Because the server can choose to serve different web clients to different people—even if you noticed the attack—it would be incredibly hard to prove the provider's guilt.
```

Reviewer 2: > @dngray's getting a little trigger-happy with that "commit suggestion" button https://github.com/privacyguides/privacyguides.org/pull/1836#discussion_r994945666 :)

Oops. I missed that one.

## Avoiding Censorship

<span class="pg-blue-gray">:material-close-outline: Censorship</span>

Censorship online can be carried out (to varying degrees) by actors including totalitarian governments, network administrators, and service providers. These efforts to control communication and restrict access to information will always be incompatible with the human right to Freedom of Expression.[^5]

Censorship on corporate platforms is increasingly common, as platforms like Twitter and Facebook give in to public demand, market pressures, and pressures from government agencies. Government pressures can be covert requests to businesses, such as the White House [requesting the takedown](https://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/17/technology/on-the-web-a-fine-line-on-free-speech-across-globe.html) of a provocative YouTube video, or overt, such as the Chinese government requiring companies to adhere to a strict regime of censorship.

> People concerned with the threat of censorship can use technologies like [Tor](tor-overview.md) to circumvent it, and support platforms which provide censorship-resistant communication, such as [Matrix](../real-time-communication.md#element), which doesn't have a centralized account authority that can close accounts arbitrarily.

Reviewer: Suggestion from https://github.com/privacyguides/privacyguides.org/pull/1836#discussion_r996251190

```suggestion
People concerned with the threat of censorship can use technologies like [Tor](tor-overview.md) to circumvent it, and support communication platforms without centralized authorities that can close accounts and block content arbitrarily, like [Matrix](../real-time-communication.md#element).
```

Although, I think this might make even more sense:

```suggestion
People concerned with the threat of censorship can use technologies like [Tor](tor-overview.md) to circumvent it, and support censorship-resistant communication platforms like [Matrix](../real-time-communication.md#element), which doesn't have a centralized account authority that can close accounts arbitrarily.
```

Reviewer 2: I like the last one, sounds less "wordy".

Author: Yeah these suggestions are much more readable, imo. I'll merge the last one!

> People concerned with the threat of censorship can use technologies like [Tor](basics/tor-overview.md) to circumvent it, and support platforms which provide censorship-resistant communication, such as [Matrix](../real-time-communication.md#element)—which doesn't have a centralized account authority that can close accounts arbitrarily.

Author: Since the last clause is parenthetical and has "Matrix" as its object (i.e. "such as Matrix" isn't an embedded clause), I think an em dash is most appropriate here. 

Perhaps clearer phrasing is better, instead.

> People concerned with the threat of censorship can use technologies like [Tor](basics/tor-overview.md) to circumvent it, and support platforms which provide censorship-resistant communication, such as [Matrix](../real-time-communication.md#element)—which doesn't have a centralized account authority that can close accounts arbitrarily.

Reviewer: I think clearer phrasing would be better. As I read this I also wonder if "which doesn't have a centralized account authority that can close accounts arbitrarily." could be removed entirely, since we explain how Matrix works in the linked listing. Maybe:

> [...] and support communication platforms without centralized authorities that can close accounts and block content arbitrarily, like Matrix.

On the flip side, proprietary software is less transparent, but that doesn't imply that it's not secure. Major proprietary software projects can be audited internally and by third-party agencies, and independent security researchers can still find vulnerabilities with techniques like reverse engineering.

To avoid biased decisions, it's *vital* that you evaluate the privacy and security standards of the software you use.

:material-numeric-2-circle: **"Shifting trust can increase privacy"**

We talk about "shifting trust" a lot, when discussing solutions like VPNs (which shift the trust you place in your ISP to the VPN provider). While this protects your browsing data from your ISP *specifically*, the VPN provider you choose still has access to your browsing data: Your data isn't completely secured from all parties. This means that:

> 1. You must exercise caution when choosing a provider to shift trust to;
> 2. And, you should still use other techniques, like E2EE, to protect your data completely. Merely distrusting one provider to trust another is not securing your data.

Reviewer: I don't know which of these is the proper way to write this, but I don't like list items beginning with "and."

```suggestion
1. You must exercise caution when choosing a provider to shift trust to; and
2. You should still use other techniques, like E2EE, to protect your data completely. Merely distrusting one provider to trust another is not securing your data.
```

```suggestion
1. You must exercise caution when choosing a provider to shift trust to;
2. You should still use other techniques, like E2EE, to protect your data completely. Merely distrusting one provider to trust another is not securing your data.
```

```suggestion
1. You must exercise caution when choosing a provider to shift trust to.
2. You should still use other techniques, like E2EE, to protect your data completely. Merely distrusting one provider to trust another is not securing your data.
```

Author: If that's the stylistic preference, then I think the last suggestion makes the most sense—I'll commit the changes.

:material-numeric-3-circle: **"Privacy-focused solutions are inherently trustworthy"**

> Focusing solely on the privacy policies and marketing of a tool or provider can blind you to its weaknesses. When you're looking for a more private solution, you should determine what the underlying problem is and find technical solutions to that problem. For example, you may want to avoid Google Drive, which gives Google access to all of your data. The underlying problem, in this case, is lack of E2EE, so you should make sure that the provider you switch to actually implements E2EE, or use a tool (like [Cryptomator](encryption.md#cryptomator-cloud)) which provides E2EE on any cloud provider. Switching to a "privacy-focused" provider (that doesn't implement E2EE) doesn't solve your problem: it just shifts trust from Google to that provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Focusing solely on the privacy policies and marketing of a tool or provider can blind you to its weaknesses. When you're looking for a more private solution, you should determine what the underlying problem is and find technical solutions to that problem. For example, you may want to avoid Google Drive, which gives Google access to all of your data. The underlying problem in this case is lack of E2EE, so you should make sure that the provider you switch to actually implements E2EE, or use a tool (like [Cryptomator](encryption.md#cryptomator-cloud)) which provides E2EE on any cloud provider. Switching to a "privacy-focused" provider (that doesn't implement E2EE) doesn't solve your problem: it just shifts trust from Google to that provider.
```

Author: "in this case" is parenthetical, so it should either be an embedded clause or using other punctuation, like parentheses.

Reviewer: I don't think you are correct, "in this case" is a restrictive clause because it is necessary to the meaning of the sentence. For the reader to know where the problem exists and what the solution is, they need to be aware of the example case referenced in the preceding sentence about Google Drive.

If you write it in the way you are suggesting, the sentence would have to make sense in a context in which the example doesn't exist, like so:

> When you're looking for a more private solution, you should determine what the underlying problem is and find technical solutions to that problem. ~~For example, you may want to avoid Google Drive, which gives Google access to all of your data.~~ The underlying problem ~~in this case~~ is lack of E2EE, so you should make sure that the provider you switch to actually implements E2EE [...]

> When you're looking for a more private solution, you should determine what the underlying problem is and find technical solutions to that problem. The underlying problem is lack of E2EE, so you should make sure that the provider you switch to actually implements E2EE [...]

However, this paragraph clearly does *not* make sense, because "lack of E2EE" is a problem specific to providers like Google Drive and not *the* only problem to consider.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dependent_clause#Punctuation

Reviewer 2: > in this case

Maybe it should be "in that case"?

Author: That's a fair point, and I understand what you mean. I felt that the context of the previous sentence clarified the object (i.e. "the underlying problem" refers to the example), so the "in this case" is non-restrictive. Hence, it's parenthetical.

**But**, I agree: I don't think the relationship is as clear as I thought, so erring on the side of caution (i.e. reading it in a restrictive sense) seems like good practice. Unnecessary is definitely best avoided! :smile:

Finding the "best" solution for yourself doesn't necessarily mean you are after an infallible solution with dozens of conditions—these solutions are often difficult to work with realistically. As we discussed previously, security often comes at the cost of convenience. Below, we provide some tips:

1. ==Actions need to serve a particular purpose:== think about how to do what you want with the fewest actions.
2. ==Remove human failure points:== We fail, get tired, and forget things. To maintain security, avoid relying on manual conditions and processes that you have to remember.
3. ==Use the right level of protection for what you intend.== We often see recommendations of so-called law-enforcement or subpoena-proof solutions. These often require specialist knowledge and generally aren't what people want. There's no point in building an intricate threat model for anonymity if you can be easily de-anonymized by a simple oversight.

So, how might this look?

One of the clearest threat models is one where people *know who you are* and one where they do not. There will always be situations where you must declare your legal name and there are others where you don't need to.

> 1. **Known identity** - A known identity is used for things where you must declare your name. There are many legal documents and contracts where a legal identity is required. This could range from opening a bank account; signing a property lease; obtaining a passport; customs declarations when importing items; or otherwise dealing with your Government. These things will usually lead to credentials such as credit cards, credit rating checks, account numbers, and possibly physical addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Known identity** - A known identity is used for things where you must declare your name. There are many legal documents and contracts where a legal identity is required. This could range from opening a bank account, signing a property lease, obtaining a passport, customs declarations when importing items, or otherwise dealing with your Government. These things will usually lead to credentials such as credit cards, credit rating checks, account numbers, and possibly physical addresses.
```

    We don't suggest using a VPN or Tor for any of these things, as your identity is already known through other means.

    !!! tip

        When shopping online, the use of a [parcel locker](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parcel_locker) can help keep your physical address private.

2. **Unknown identity** - An unknown identity could be a stable pseudonym that you regularly use. It is not anonymous because it doesn't change. If you're part of an online community, you may wish to retain a persona that others know. This pseudonym isn't anonymous because—if monitored for long enough—details about the owner can reveal further information, such as the way they write, their general knowledge about topics of interest, etc.

>     You may wish to use a VPN for this, to mask your IP address. Financial transactions are more difficult and, for this, we suggest using anonymous cryptocurrencies, such as [Monero](https://www.getmonero.org/). Employing altcoin shifting may also help to disguise where your currency originated. Typically, exchanges require KYC (know your customer) to be completed before they'll allow you to exchange fiat currency into any kind of cryptocurrency. Local meet-up options may also be a solution; however, those are often more expensive and sometimes also require KYC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You may wish to use a VPN for this, to mask your IP address. Financial transactions are more difficult to mask: You could consider using anonymous cryptocurrencies, such as [Monero](https://www.getmonero.org/). Employing altcoin shifting may also help to disguise where your currency originated. Typically, exchanges require KYC (know your customer) to be completed before they'll allow you to exchange fiat currency into any kind of cryptocurrency. Local meet-up options may also be a solution; however, those are often more expensive and sometimes also require KYC.
```
